[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All right, here we go.
Ready?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[LAUGHTER]
>> I was about to
travel to Texas.
And unfortunately,
our entire family
had come down with the flu.
[CLICKS]
And you know in large
families, it just
travels down from one child
to the next to the next.
>> And this time
though with Sierra,
it had hung on a little
bit longer than the others.
So we took her to
the pediatrician.
And he took a look at her
and he said, she's fine,
it's just a bad flu this year.
Don't worry about it.
And the next day, she got worse.
>> Everything had changed
with our daughter.
She was completely limp.
She was having
trouble breathing.
I called my husband.
I was in a total panic.
>> When Jamie arrived at
the ER later that morning,
one of the charge nurses
took one look at Sierra
and didn't even
process paperwork.
Took her out of Jamie's
arms and immediately started
working on her.
>> They told me they were
ordering a medical transport,
taking her to the best
children's hospital.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> They did a few tests.
And pretty quickly, they came
back and they told Jamie,
your daughter's having
a diabetic ketoacidosis.
>> Those words
meant nothing to me.
I'd never heard it.
I didn't know what it meant.
>> My initial reaction
is, well, that's fine,
but she's not diabetic.
And the response to that
is, well, she is now.
>> When you see your child
sitting there lifeless and all
the tubes hooked up and
the monitors beeping,
all you can think is praying for
mercy that God would spare her
soul.
Bring her back to you.
[BEEPING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The word "diabetes" comes
from the ancient Greek word
for "funnel."
Because with so much
drinking and urinating,
a diabetic seemingly funneled
out anything that they drank.
The world has been studying
the disease ever since.
And after all of this
time, there is still
not an exact known cause, and
there is still no known cure
for type 1 diabetes.
What we know is that
for some reason,
your body attacks itself.
Your immune system
mistakenly destroys
all of the beta cells that make
your body's natural insulin,
leaving you unable to make
any diagnosis type 1 diabetes.
The general guideline from
the Diabetes Association
to the diabetes community is
that a person with diabetes
does not need to
change their diet.
As long as they practice
their recommended method
for controlling the disease
by counting carbohydrates
and matching it with
a dose of insulin.
This fallacy has been
perpetuated by major diabetes
organizations, pharmaceutical
corporations, and food
manufacturers for profit
for over 50 years.
[LAUGHING]
>> People have not been told
the full truth on how to manage
their diabetes and what
the consequences are.
>> Heart disease, cancer,
diabetic peripheral neuropathy.
It affects every part
of the organ system.
It leads to amputations,
heart attacks.
It decreases the life expectancy
on average 11 to 14 years just
with the diagnosis alone
of type 1 diabetes.
So once somebody is diagnosed,
the clock's ticking.
[TICKING]
[RINGS]
>> Well, I think we better
have some chemistry, kids.
I'm going to show you
the model of a molecule
from which substances are made.
Here we are.
Now this is a molecule
of what substance?
Fierce looking thing, isn't it?
Ruby?
>> Well, It'd be a
carbohydrate called glucose.
>> Correct.
Fine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A healthy human body is an
extremely efficient machine.
And it is fueled by
the food that we eat.
Carbohydrates like
bread, cereal, and pasta
get broken down in our digestive
system and turned into sugar
called glucose.
That glucose enters
our bloodstream
and travels throughout the body
to provide energy to our cells.
But that's not the whole story.
Glucose cannot enter
cells on its own.
It needs insulin.
When we eat, a healthy body
creates the appropriate amount
of insulin for the glucose.
And that insulin is what unlocks
the cells for the glucose.
Without insulin, glucose
will stay in the blood
and turn it thick and syrupy,
damaging internal organs
and dehydrating the
body, causing starvation,
and eventually, death.
[BEEPS]
>> Type 1 diabetics
don't make insulin.
They have to have insulin.
For type 2 diabetics,
they never need insulin
because their pancreas still
makes plenty of insulin.
Type 2 diabetics--
pancreas is having
to work overtime because
they're eating far too
many carbohydrates in the diet.
I personally don't even think
that type 2 diabetes should
be called diabetes.
It should be called
what it actually
is, which is carbohydrate
overdose syndrome
or carbohydrate
toxicity syndrome.
[CLICKS]
>> So my son Dave, he was on
a really good football team,
and his play just
dropped off the cliff.
He could barely throw a pass.
And we didn't know
what was wrong.
When we took him to
the doctors again,
the doctor said that he had some
kind of flu and to make sure
he keeps eating, and
he'll get better.
And he looked like
a bag of bones.
And we took him back
to the pediatrician,
and she finally
agreed to do tests.
The next day when the
test results came in,
we got an emergency
call from her.
He needs to immediately
report to the emergency room.
>> A healthy,
non-diabetic, active,
fit kid is going to have blood
sugars in the 80s and 90s.
>> I would give Dave a meal that
we had been instructed on how
to compose from the dietitian.
And within a half an hour,
his blood sugar would be 280.
And I would inject
him with insulin
to get the blood
sugar back down.
And with an hour or
an hour and a half,
his blood sugar would be down
to 40 milligrams per deciliter,
and he'd be feeling terrible.
>> My numbers were
like this all the time.
And it just, I wasn't feeling
good, because I was either low
or it just skyrocketed.
[CAMERA SHUTTER CLICKS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was a Friday night, and
he finally started feeling like
himself again.
And we went over
to my mom's house,
and we had a big family dinner.
And then that night,
he woke up at 3:00
in the morning throwing up.
And he had lost some weight.
And so I finally was like,
I've got to take him in.
So I took him into the ER.
And they admitted
him right away.
And he had a blood
sugar of close to 700.
And his A1C--
I don't remember--
it was 13, somewhere
between 13 and 15 at the time.
>> Those numbers didn't
mean anything to me.
I didn't know what they were.
>> I didn't really remember
much in the hospital.
I remember sleeping
for two days.
And I woke up, and I
thought it was Saturday
when it was really Sunday.
[CAMERA SHUTTER CLICKS]
>> My son was diagnosed five
years ago with type 1 diabetes.
And for the first three
years after his diagnosis,
we floundered.
>> I didn't feel very good.
My average blood sugar
then was like 170.
>> We tried to do
everything by the books,
as we were taught
in the hospital.
You are always giving more
insulin, giving more sugar,
giving more insulin, to try
and achieve a flat line.
And it's not possible.
[CAMERA SHUTTER CLICKS]
>> Neither of us have type
1 diabetes in our family.
But Jack at the age of two--
he turned two in October,
and he was diagnosed
December of that same year.
Completely caught us off guard.
We thought maybe he had
the flu or some type
of viral infection.
We weren't even told what
normal blood sugars were.
We were sent home
with instruction
to keep his blood sugar at 150.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was presumed that he would
be eating a lot of carbohydrates
that would require
a lot of insulin,
specifically large doses of
very fast acting insulin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> After years of research, a
small group at the University
of Toronto was able to isolate
insulin by experimenting
on a dog's pancreas in 1921.
Shortly after, a
patent on insulin
was awarded to the group.
But they sold it to
the university for $1.
Sir Frederick Banting,
one of those scientists,
justified the $1 sale, noting,
"Insulin belongs to the world,
not to me."
[HISSING]
This would lead to the
University of Toronto
partnering with Eli
Lilly and Company
to become the first
to manufacture insulin
as a life-saving
treatment of diabetes.
Today, much of the
world's insulin production
comes from one of
three companies--
Eli Lilly, Sanofi,
or Novo Nordisk.
>> I like to call hypoglycemia
an insulin overdose.
Right.
So if you're eating
a high carb meal,
you need a high dose of insulin.
You're playing a balancing
act between this high carb
and this high dose of insulin.
And sometimes you roll
the dice and you hit it,
but most of the
time, you're going
to be off one way or the other.
>> This isn't an
optional medicine.
This is a vitamin or something
that will help with allergies.
This is life-saving.
If our children don't
have insulin, they die.
That's what happened to kids
before insulin came around.
You did your best to
limit carbohydrates,
but their blood
sugars were high.
They wasted away, and they died.
>> When I was diagnosed
at nine years old,
I remember I was
about 35 pounds.
If you see any of
those pictures that
go way back to right before
insulin and then after insulin,
you have these kids that
were skin and bones--
that was me.
What I do remember is probably
every 15 to 30 minutes,
I was drinking 16,
20 ounces of water,
and following that up with
basically emptying it out
just as fast.
[CLICKS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Two months after my
diagnosis, we got a phone call.
>> About me.
>> About this one that she
had just been diagnosed,
and she needed a foster family.
So I followed the ADA diet that
they had told me to stick to.
Eat 60 carbs breakfast,
lunch, and dinner.
Take x amount of insulin.
And then in between each meal,
eat 15 carbs with no insulin.
And so I thought, OK, if I
do exactly what they say,
then I'll have success and
I'll have good blood sugar,
because I'm following the paper.
And I'm an A
student, so I'm going
to do exactly what they say.
>> These guidelines were given
to hospitals and physicians
and dietitians by the
American Diabetes Association.
It's the guiding force behind
how people with diabetes
are treated.
>> The American Diabetes
Association is the preeminent
organization for diabetes
guidelines in the United
States.
Through research from
various organizations,
they provide recommendations
to hospitals, doctors,
and practitioners.
Who, in turn, give them to
their patients with diabetes,
who build their grocery lists
and fill their prescriptions.
They are funded by
grants and donations.
The largest of these
donors, ironically
called Banting Donors,
after Sir Frederick Banting,
include the three largest
insulin manufacturers.
>> No one has betrayed diabetics
more than the American Diabetes
Association.
It's safe to say that
the American Diabetes
Association has been bought
off by the millions of dollars
that big pharmaceutical
corporations give them
every year.
They get millions of dollars
a year from multiple big food
manufacturers like Pepsi
and Coca-Cola and Kraft
and Kellogg's.
In order to keep
the large donors
happy to treat
diabetes and manage it
as a chronic
progressive disease,
they ignore the diabetics.
And the diabetics are
the one ultimately
who suffer from this.
>> I was miserable.
I just felt sick and nauseous.
And, I mean, there
just aren't words
to describe the fear that
comes with blood sugar going
up and down, riding
the roller coaster.
[YELLING]
[BLOWING]
>> And people don't know that
there is another option out
there or another
way of management.
[BLOWING]
>> I was diagnosed my
freshman year in college.
I was about ready to turn 18.
And I thought that the freshman
15 was totally a fallacy.
I was losing weight.
I was sleeping great,
sleeping a lot.
I could eat anything I wanted,
drink anything I wanted,
and I was losing weight.
Finally, somebody said,
you look like death.
>> From diagnosis through pretty
much when I graduated from high
school, it was
just ups and downs.
And I--
>> You missed 40%
of high school.
>> [LAUGHS] I missed
40% of high school.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Blood sugars were never--
they were just up.
The roller coasters that
you see on CGM graphs now.
We didn't have CGMs
back then, but that's
what my blood sugar did.
And I didn't-- I just
didn't feel good.
I just didn't feel good.
But it just became
normal to not feel good.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I was 20, I was
pregnant with my first child,
and I was told that I
had gestational diabetes.
By the time I had
my fourth child,
they said, well, it's
decided to just stay.
You're diabetic now.
I started noticing my
health deteriorating.
I feel like my pancreas was
sputtering at that point.
So sometimes it would work,
and sometimes it wouldn't.
But it was really unpredictable.
First I had the cataracts.
And then I started
having retinal bleeds.
I developed a lot
of skin issues.
Cystic acne.
And I also have
gastroparesis, which
is the nausea, the
vomiting, and then
some subsequent
digestive issues.
I have trouble
controlling my bowels.
It's called diabetic diarrhea.
Neuropathy in my hands.
Neuropathy in my feet.
It was up to my
knees at one point.
And then about seven years
ago for Mother's Day,
I got a pedicure.
(SOFTLY) Sorry.
And I developed a foot ulcer.
It was infected lots
and lots of times.
Why do they make
bathroom tiles white?
I was always leaving
little red footprints.
Because it would open
up, and I would bleed.
I was told that blood glucose
of up to 180 was perfectly fine.
Every complication I have
was simmering and developing
for all those years.
Because that's too high.
I was told to avoid fat.
I was told to not have
a lot of red meat.
Try to have lots of
fish and chicken.
And to otherwise
just count my carbs
and inject the
insulin appropriately.
I wasn't given a specific diet.
Just told to inject and test.
So I wish I could go
back and change that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Films of President Eisenhower
made just before his heart
attack.
A dramatic evidence
of the suddenness
of the illness that
shocked the nation.
>> The heart attack of President
Dwight Eisenhower in 1955 would
start a chain of events that
would change the American diet
for the next 65 years.
With a general rise in heart
attacks throughout the country
in the 1950s, Ike's heart
attack had the nation
scrambling for answers.
One physiologist, Ansel Keys,
declared that saturated fats
were the culprit.
Even though his
scientific methods
were found to be
flawed, and as a result,
his outcomes were
incorrect, this
was an answer that the
country could latch on to.
The American Heart
Association then
pushed out their low fat diet.
Which led to the food
pyramid, a recommendation
to eat a low-fat, heavy
carbohydrate diet.
>> I think the fundamental
problem is that the doctors are
using 1970s style nutrition
for reasons that were never
correct.
These myths have persisted
for many decades now.
>> Really during that time from
my diagnosis in 1977 through
to '95, was really the time
period where the food pyramid
was actually turned upside down.
And that's when all the carbo
was starting to be pushed
and the low fat.
Basically, it was OK to eat
bread or rice or this or that.
That was part of my
meals every single day.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For ages, certain foods
have been thought to contribute
to good health.
Now, the FDA has determined
the scientific link
between nutrients
and certain diseases.
The connection between
diet and health
has never been so well defined.
But to make the
link even clearer,
the federal government has
designed this food pyramid.
It's built around
five food groups.
At its base are foods
like breads and pastas,
that should be eaten
in greatest quantity.
Foods that should
be eaten sparingly,
like those containing
fats, oils, and sugar,
are at the top.
>> Mathematically, if you look
at the food pyramid and if you
try to make a, say, a
food plan for a child,
if you get rid of saturated
fat from protein foods,
like meat and cheese and
eggs, you've gotten rid of all
the caloric needs of the child.
So there's only one place to
go to fill those caloric needs,
and that's by putting in a lot
of grains and vegetable oils.
>> I would either first
skyrocket and then probably
crash.
Or reverse-- I would
crash first and then eat
a lot of sugar along with the
bread, and then skyrocket.
>> The day that
Brooklyn was diagnosed,
we were actually
at Disney World.
She started vomiting on our
17-hour trip down there.
We just assumed it was
car sickness or the flu,
because it was November,
that's flu season.
She had just played the World
Series a few months before.
[CHEERING]
>> So she's breathing so
loud that I can hear it
in the opposite bed.
I grab her underneath
her-- (SIGHS)
I grab her underneath her back,
and I say, Brooklyn, Brooklyn?
Brooklyn.
And she's looking at
me, but she's not.
Her eyes are glassed over.
Had we not gotten Brooklyn
to the ER when we did,
she would have died.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When she did finally
wake up and they
felt that it was safe
to feed my child,
they fed her
pancakes, apple sauce.
She had yogurt.
They're hitting
her with insulin,
but the insulin's
not meeting the carbs
that they just put into her.
She's on an insulin drip.
But yet, the insulin drip is
not keeping her blood sugar down
because they're feeding
her so many carbs.
>> When they moved us out
of ICU into a regular room,
the nurses brought one
of her first meals.
And I was in shock at what
they were going to feed her.
It was a personal
pepperoni pizza,
a container of ice cream, a
juice box, and some fruit.
It was over 90 carbs
for a very first meal.
The second meal
that they brought
was French toast, fruit, and
orange juice, the next meal.
Then after that was a grilled
cheese, mashed potatoes,
and another juice box
for a type 1 diabetic.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Here, try it again.
OK, eat.
Mmm.
Yeah, you can have it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Mmm.
>> It didn't make any sense.
If you're feeding a ton
of carbohydrate food,
it's only going to send the
blood sugar skyrocketing.
>> Carbohydrate is the most
potent determiner of your blood
sugar.
OK, if you have type 1 or
your kids have type 1--
everybody knows
that blood sugars
can be affected by many things.
But carbohydrate is the biggie.
The patient asks the doctor,
aren't the complications
caused by high blood sugars?
Yes.
What foods cause
high blood sugars?
Carbohydrate.
Then what should I eat?
Does that make sense?
It doesn't make sense, but
you're in the state of,
did you see my son?
He's almost dead.
You're in a state of terror.
So it doesn't make sense, but
you don't know what's going on.
You're disoriented.
>> Why would we pump our kids
full of food that challenges
their body?
Their bodies that are already
not able to make insulin.
Why would we do that to them?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I have friends who
have severe nut allergies.
They would never dream
of going near nuts.
My daughter is essentially
allergic to carbs.
She cannot process
carbohydrates.
She cannot, just like all
other type 1 diabetics.
Yet the overall
medical community
is telling me the opposite.
>> Lactose intolerant
people don't drink milk.
Diabetics should not
eat that many carbs.
>> So when the nutritionist
came in, she said,
he can have orange juice
and he can have pancakes.
And you can still
take him to Pizza Hut.
>> I was never told that sugar
raises blood sugar more rapidly
than other food.
And I didn't have that
previous knowledge,
so if I would have left the
hospital with that information,
I would have felt so much more
ready to take on this disease.
>> Eventually, I met
my endocrinologist.
She was going over
how to count carbs
and dose my insulin
appropriately.
And everything was about carbs
and insulin, carbs and insulin.
I said to her, do you want me
to just not eat those carbs?
And she said, no, it
won't do you any good,
and you need those carbs.
And both those
statements couldn't
be any more untrue, I know now.
>> I was told time
after time after time,
there is no such thing
as a diabetic diet.
Just whatever the standard diet
is that you've been giving her,
just keep giving her that.
The most important
thing is learning
how to control it with insulin.
>> So when we were
in the hospital,
I remember them saying, eat
whatever you want and dose
for it.
And actually, his first
meal in the hospital
was a breakfast burrito.
Because I was like, that's
eggs, that's no carbs,
so we don't have to
dose you for that.
But then he wanted two cookies.
And after every meal,
he had two cookies.
And we left the hospital
with him being over 300--
still.
>> My entire nursing career,
this is how we've done it.
I knew that my patients at my
job ate whatever they wanted,
and we just gave them
the sliding scale.
I knew that their
numbers were 200 and 300.
I knew that that was the norm.
That was the diabetic community.
>> For most medical
doctors, including me,
nutrition education is at
the very bottom of our list
of things that we're taught
about in medical school.
Most doctors and most
medical school educators
are neo maniacs--
everything new.
They want birthing
technology, new research.
If you start talking about a
dietary intervention that's
250,000 years old, everyone
at the table's eyes
will glass over,
because that's not new.
You can't get a patent on it.
Big food manufacturers are
not interested in that at all.
There are no
billion dollar drugs
that can be fashioned from
talking about nutrition.
So you can't make any
money on the nutrition
idea that's hundreds of
thousands of years old.
[RINGING]
>> The governing bodies put
these recommendations out,
and it forces physicians to
live within those guidelines
for fear of reprisal.
>> And if you don't follow the
ADA guidelines as a doctor,
you can open yourself
up to litigation.
So there's a dual prong where
not only do the doctors never
learn how to control
blood sugars,
they don't learn about
proper nutrition.
But even if they do,
they're essentially
forced to follow these
incorrect guidelines.
Obviously incorrect guidelines.
>> In the recent position
statement regarding management
of diabetes for type 1
children, the American Diabetes
Association failed to have a
section dedicated to either
food or diet, which are the
main contributors to high blood
sugar levels, which are
responsible for diabetes
complications.
The Lifestyle Management
section notes,
"There is no single ideal
dietary distribution
of calories among carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins
for people with diabetes."
>> I see it in
these parent groups.
There's a lot of
parent groups out there
that these people are--
they're not even diabetic.
And they're sitting there
giving advice, right.
And hey, you know what?
Your kid's numbers don't matter.
Doesn't matter.
It's all good.
So you can go in
there and you can
share your graph of
your 400, and everybody
will pat you on the back
and say, hey, you know what?
Thoughts and prayers
go out to you.
Well I got news for you.
When your shoulder glycates
or your kidney fails,
those thoughts and prayers
don't mean anything.
They don't.
>> You go online on Facebook.
So probably a lot of
people on social media.
You see dumb stuff like this.
>> He won't have any
energy unless you give him
carbohydrates.
Your child will resent you
for the rest of his life.
What kind of mother
are you to deprive
your child of a childhood?
He's not going to learn as well.
He's not going to grow.
>> You have to have sugar for
your body to metabolize energy.
And if they don't have the
sugars, then they won't grow.
That's what we were
told over and over.
>> I've been researching for
over a year low carbohydrate
diets, growth in children.
And I printed out
over 60 articles
that talk about,
protein, not carbohydrate
drives long bone
growth in children.
>> People have suggested to
patients and their family that
carbohydrates are
required for growth.
Totally false.
Don't know where that
belief comes from.
Our body can produce
all the glucose
it needs from gluconeogenesis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This model exists where being
a kid is about eating cupcakes
or cake and pizza and
all that crap, right.
But as a T1 young
kid, if you're not
feeding them protein
and vegetables
and keeping normal
blood sugar, that kid's
never going to grow to his
or her full potential, ever.
>> Nighttime is a particularly
scary time for parents when
they have a child with diabetes.
Because if that child
goes low in the night--
[SIRENS]
--well, they can go into
a coma and not wake up.
>> That's what people are
afraid of with young children.
They fear that low blood
sugar, seizure, coma, death.
That's the scariest.
It's immediate.
It happens overnight.
So I think people think if you
give your child carbohydrates,
you're going to
somehow help with that.
But the truth is it's
the large dose of insulin
you're giving your child that
puts them at the most risk.
The only reason a child
has a low blood sugar
is because there's too
much insulin in their body.
>> These very companies who
are supposed to be helping us
and advocating for us and
curing us are not, right.
They're putting their
name on stuff that
basically causes complications.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So families are
given a cookbook,
and it features characters that
children might see on morning
cartoons.
And each character is presenting
a recipe to that child
or to that mom.
And these recipes are
full of carbohydrates.
And one of them
that I recall was
a recipe featuring a magical
character that both of my sons
love.
And it was for pumpkin waffles.
And I think just
for the waffle, it
was something around
44 carbohydrates.
And that's without adding syrup.
So if you give your child
a waffle and some syrup
for breakfast, that's
80-some carbohydrates--
a disaster.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I've never seen the Pink
Panther stuff about carb
counting and how insulin works.
We just did what they told us.
I remember our CDE said
she can eat whatever she
wants, as long as she covers.
And highs are not a big deal,
as long as you catch them.
So don't worry about spiking
after meals or whatever.
But as long as you're
not staying up there
and you're catching them
and bringing them back down.
That was what we were taught.
>> There's another publication
given to us by the American
Diabetes Association, and it has
a page where it's trying to do
a little myth-busting.
And one of them is it's a
myth that people with type 1
diabetes can't eat sugar.
Now, why, when they're given
such a platform and such
an ability to reach people?
Why would you not
say at that moment,
it's better for people
with type 1 diabetes
to completely avoid sugar?
It's just a wasted
opportunity by a big governing
body that holds a lot of
power with these new families.
>> That's basically the
education that we got--
a crash course in
carb counting, ratios.
How the insulin was supposed
to move the glucose into cells.
And it all had to do with
his carbohydrate intake.
We were told that he can eat
cheeseburgers and fast food,
and that these things
wouldn't change
because he was type 1 diabetic.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If I wanted to have a
brownie and I wanted to sit down
and actually calculate how many
real carbs are in there and how
if it's white sugar or brown
sugar or oats or whole grain,
whatever-- you wanted
to calculate all of that
accurately based on grams
and glycemic index and how
it's working in my body, and
if I worked out and if I slept
well, and if I'm in a good mood
or a bad mood and if I have
insulin on board--
go for it.
Most people don't have time.
They just take a random
ratio, insulin-to-carb ratio,
that their endocrinologist
set six or eight months ago.
Hasn't been tweaked.
Hasn't been changed.
And they take a brownie,
and their blood sugar still
goes high.
>> Carb counting as a method
to manage diabetes is flawed
for many reasons.
But one of the most obvious
that I hope anyone can grasp
is that the FDA allows
food manufacturers
to be off in their carbohydrate
counts on their labels
by plus or minus 20%.
So even if you are the most avid
carb counter and you weigh food
and you measure it, the
fact that the label itself
can be off on a count will
set you up for failure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It is estimated that over 415
million people are living with
diabetes all over
the world today.
In the United States,
an estimated 35 million
diabetic patients spend over
$330 billion per year on care.
Making diabetes the most
expensive chronic disease
in the country.
Global insulin sales are
currently near $20 billion
per year.
And costs are rising.
>> If every diabetic adopted
a low carbohydrate diet,
there would be multiple billion
dollar big pharma corporations
that would go bankrupt.
The big pharma
corporations would
be in dire financial
straits if they were not
able to ride the backs
of diabetics anymore.
>> Industry wants us
buying their products.
Pharmaceutical companies want us
buying their products as well.
So when we're paying
for carbohydrate food
and we're paying for
big amounts of insulin,
those companies are thriving.
If every person
with type 1 diabetes
reduced their amount
of insulin by 65%,
someone is going to
feel the sting of that.
>> The very first time I went
to CVS and bought NovoLog
for $400, your heart is
trying to figure out,
how in the world are you going
to sustain this lifestyle
to keep your child alive?
This is what's needed for life,
and it's insanely expensive.
I go to the refrigerator, and
I pull out the vial of NovoLog
to give Sierra her morning dose.
And I hadn't had coffee
yet, and I was still sleepy.
And I fumbled with the insulin,
and it shattered to the floor.
And I cried buckets of tears.
$400 of her lifesaving
medicine on the ground.
How the heck are we going
to continue doing this?
How can any family afford
to keep their kid alive?
No parent should ever
have to think about that.
(SOFTLY) Sorry.
>> This is a 24 hour
a day rollercoaster.
This isn't the kind of
ride you take a break from.
This is day and night.
And we were desperate
for something else.
In the hospitals, we
started doing research.
And on the internet
doing a Google search,
we kept seeing this
name, Dr. Bernstein.
>> Bernstein.
>> Dr. Bernstein.
>> Bernstein's.
>> I read Bernstein's book
and really got my blood sugars
under control to
non-diabetic levels.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I remember the date that I
first developed the symptoms,
because it was a couple of
months after the atom bomb was
dropped.
Late 1946, diagnosis-- diabetes.
We had to use reusable
syringes and needles, which
we sterilized in boiling water.
After it cooled off,
we'd assemble it.
And the needles would get dull.
And we had to
sharpen the needles.
We had a pumice stone,
and you'd rub the needle
on the pumice stone and
get rid of the hooks.
You didn't know what your
blood sugar level was.
Most of the time, it was
either very low or very high.
And my low blood sugars
were a constant problem
for the family.
And it happened that I was
working for a company that made
clinical laboratory equipment.
And I saw an ad for
a three pound device
that could be used
in emergency rooms
to distinguish
unconscious drunks
from unconscious diabetics
by the blood sugars.
I said, if I knew
my blood sugars--
I'm an engineer.
If I knew my blood sugars, I
could do something about them.
So I ordered a meter and started
measuring my blood sugars.
In the early days, I had
a very creative lunch.
Peanut butter, mayo, and
tuna on date nut bread.
I found that the highest
blood sugars were after lunch.
So I said, well, if lunch
is the biggest culprit,
it must be because
the carbohydrate.
So I'm going to
eliminate the bread
and eliminate the peanut
butter, and I'll just
have the tuna fish
and mayo and a salad.
Whammo.
The amount of insulin I took
for lunch dropped dramatically,
and the blood sugars after
lunch became predictable.
I decided at that point that I
had to get this information out
and that the doctors
would bend over backwards.
So the first thing I did
was approach my own doctor,
who was president of the
American Diabetes Association.
And he said, people come to me
once a month for a blood sugar.
If they can measure
it themselves,
I'd have no patients.
No one would come to see me.
I wrote a-- it was
like a cookbook.
Step by step, what do you do
to have normal blood sugar
if you're a type 1 diabetic?
I submitted it to
many medical journals,
and they were all rejected.
So I decided I would
go to medical school
to get an MDF to my
name and therefore
be able to get published.
I was diagnosed at age 12, and
life expectancy for a type 1
diabetic was 30 years.
And I'm 86 right now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What's happened instantly,
I've made instant glucose just
by chewing the bread.
Unconscious episode
in hypoglycemia.
>> But Bernstein's situation
just made sense to me.
He was the first
diabetic that we
know of that checked
his own blood sugar.
Now every diabetic checks
their own blood sugar.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
He was able to
realize, my blood sugar
is directly affected
by the foods I eat.
This shouldn't be a
big surprise, right.
By reducing his
carb intake, he was
able to significantly stabilize
the swings in his blood sugar
over time.
And that made a
lot of sense to us.
And we said, well,
let's give this a shot.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I couldn't believe
the reduction in insulin.
Instantaneously, you started to
notice the blood sugars coming
on down.
And so you cannot continue
giving those large doses
of insulin, because
you're low carb.
>> I thank God I
found Dr. Bernstein.
Our insulin only costs $45.
And that insulin
lasts us six months.
And it keeps my baby stable.
She's not fighting lows,
she's not fighting highs.
She has a straight line.
>> Honestly, what we found
is that we found some really
amazing recipes.
And the foods we're eating now
on this low carb restriction
are some of the richest,
most delicious plates
that we've ever eaten before.
>> We make low carb ice cream.
We make low carb pizza.
We make low carb cupcakes.
>> There's low carb desserts.
There's all these low carb
foods that you can eat.
You don't feel deprived.
There's nothing
that I can't eat.
You just have to
change the recipe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We have a chart in
our kitchen that has all
the dinners that we have
throughout the week,
so whatever is on there.
But the dinner always consists
of a protein and a salad
or some type of vegetables.
>> Our whole family is healthier
now that we've all changed
our diet to adapt
to what River eats.
It's easier for me.
I cook one meal.
It's simple cooking.
It's natural.
It's easy to find.
A simple saute of
some vegetables
and throwing some meat on the
grill and a salad and maybe
a low carb treat.
>> We have this moniker
now that we're low carb.
And, I mean, I'm
also low alcohol.
I mean, I'm also low drugs.
I mean, it's a mixed
up name, I think.
Because we don't say,
oh, I'm high carb.
I mean, nobody says that.
I eat the way that I think
our disease dictates,
which is carbohydrate
intolerance.
[HISSING]
>> Why is this not
something I knew before?
I'm a dietitian, I went
to school for this.
And I've had diabetes
for 20-plus years.
Yet I've never heard
of this in my life.
[SCREAMING]
[LAUGHS]
I just decided to
give it a shot.
My insulin needs cut in half.
My blood sugars--
rarely over 120 anymore.
>> Changing my diet to a low
carb diet made my blood sugars
so much easier to control.
I wasn't needing
to count as high.
I was taking these
lower doses of insulin.
It's much, much lower
doses of insulin.
>> I'm on year 4 now of
eating this way, low carb.
And very happy to say that
kidney disease-- gone.
The meds that they were
giving me for that-- no more.
Not even needed, per my endo.
No neuropathies.
Heart's in great shape.
>> So this is how it used to be.
And now this is how it is.
>> Being a type 1 diabetic
doesn't really define who I am
at all.
I've gotten so good
at managing myself
over these last couple of
years that it isn't really
a problem at all for
me at this point.
If I'm at a party, I'll eat
a hamburger without a bun.
No one cares if I eat--
I'll eat pizza without
the crust underneath,
and it's not a big deal.
>> 10 years ago when I
started eating low carb,
it was really tough to get
low carb portions at dinner
or, hold the fries, give
me broccoli instead.
Now it's very, very common.
Restaurants understand.
Stores have low carb products.
It's much, much easier.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We eat cake, but we
make a low carb cake, so--
>> I got one for my birthday.
>> What did we make
for your birthday?
>> A mud pie.
>> A mud pie, a
low carb mud pie.
>> For breakfast,
just about every day,
we have bacon and eggs.
We saute them in rich butter.
>> This is not a Brooklyn issue.
This is a Wesley family issue.
What Brooklyn sees
me eating, she eats.
You have to be an
example for your child.
>> In 2018, Harvard University
led a team of doctors
and scientists to study the
low carbohydrate diet and its
effect on type 1 diabetics.
The findings were unprecedented.
The very low carbohydrate diet
resulted in non-diabetic blood
sugar levels.
Fewer hypoglycemic events,
less risk of hospitalization,
and a marked improvement
on mental health.
Instead of just
anecdotal evidence,
there's now a collection
of scientific data
that proves part of Dr.
Bernstein's diabetes solution.
Fewer carbs equals
fewer complications.
>> We know what we're
doing is working.
On the daily, his blood
sugar ranges in the 90s,
sometimes in the 80s.
The reward is that
he's a normal kid.
He doesn't feel his
diabetes nearly as much
as we do as his parents.
And for as long
as I can do it, I
want to make sure
that that happens.
>> We wanted our child
not to have complications,
to have normal blood sugars.
We wanted our life back
and we wanted to sleep.
And that's exactly what we did.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHEERING]
>> We are always on
top of Billy Lony.
And the-- I think it was
first set of our next guest.
Dikeman floats it high.
Wide open catch.
Touchdown.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Squeeze the body.
Squeeze.
Better.
(SINGING) Tonight,
sleep's coming easy.
So goodnight to the
boys and the girls.
Fly through the
atmosphere to the morning.
Slide into daylight.
Close your eyes.
Soon you'll be dreaming of
fireflies and stars in the sky.
High is your altitude
for the evening.
Gliding through the night.
[VOCALIZING]
I won't ever believe it.
Because I stay
right by your side.
Try counting all the
sheep that are leaping.
One, two, three, four, five.